# Selection from Ivo of Chartres's *Prologue*
## Ivo of Chartres. “Prologue.” *Canon Law Books in Latin Christianity,* translated by Robert Somerville, and Bruce C Brasington, pp. 132–158.

“The purpose of bodily medicine is either to drive out diseases, or to cure wounds in order to preserve health, or to strive to improve it. Nor does it appear wrong that a doctor sometimes applies harsh medicines to a patient and sometimes gentle medicines, according to the quality or degree of the patient's sickness. Sometimes he cuts with the knife that which cannot be healed with a poultice. Sometimes, conversely, he heals with a poultice what he dared not cut with the blade. Thus spiritual physicians, namely doctors of the holy Church, neither contradict themselves nor each other when they prohibit illicit things, order necessary things, exhort the highest things, permit milder things-when they impose severe laws of penance according to the hardness of heart of the delinquent for their correction or for the restraint of the rest, or when they lift these restrictions and apply the salves of indulgence according to the devotion those repenting and desiring to change, having considered the frailty of the vessel they bear. For those who are lenient look to the removal of greater ills, those who prohibit illicit things deter from death, those who command necessary things wish to preserve health, and those who exhort the highest things strive to increase health. Considering these matters the diligent reader will understand, when he clearly determines the meaning of admonition, precept, prohibition, andremission, that there is only one form of holy eloquence, and that these categories do not oppose or stand apart from one another, but that they dispense the remedy of health to all, for their direction.”
